Perrault's Fairy Tales | Cinderella

Summary
A man marries his second wife, bringing a stepmother and two older stepsisters into his young daughter's life. The stepmother despises the man's daughter and forces her to do housework. Her stepsisters give her the nickname Cinderella. The two stepsisters receive an invitation to the prince's ball, and Cinderella helps them prepare, even as they degrade her and call her unfit for attending the ball herself. When the stepsisters leave, Cinderella cries. Her fairy godmother appears to comfort and help Cinderella. She fashions a coach, horses, and a coachman out of a pumpkin, mice, and a rat, respectively. She also touches Cinderella's clothes with her magic wand and transforms the rags into a gown that is clad in gold and silver, and gives her a pair of glass slippers. The fairy godmother's only caveat is that Cinderella must return by midnight.

Cinderella attends the ball and attracts the attention of everyone, including the prince, who gives her a seat of honor and dances with her. Cinderella sits with her stepsisters, who do not recognize her, and she shares her food with them. At the appointed time, she journeys home. Once there, she tells her fairy godmother about her wonderful time, thanking her and asking if she can go to the ball again the following night. When her stepsisters knock, Cinderella lets them in and listens as they tell of a princess that no one knew. They speak of the princess's kindness and how she gave them her oranges and lemons. They also tell Cinderella about the prince's distress over not knowing the princess's name.

The next evening, the three attend the ball again. As she dances with the prince, Cinderella loses track of time, and at the first stroke of midnight, she is barely able to escape, leaving a glass slipper behind. Back at home, nothing remains of her finery except the other glass slipper. When her stepsisters return, they tell Cinderella about the princess leaving in haste. They inform Cinderella that the prince could only gaze at the lost glass slipper for the rest of the ball. They add that the palace doorkeepers claimed to see nothing but a girl, "very ill-clad, who looked more like a peasant than a young lady" running from the palace.

A few days later, the prince proclaims that he will marry the girl whose foot fits into the tiny glass slipper. Every lady in the kingdom tries the slipper on, but it only fits Cinderella. Her stepsisters are astonished. At that moment, the fairy godmother appears to put Cinderella into her most magnificent dress. The stepsisters apologize and ask forgiveness, which Cinderella grants. She even allows them palace apartments and marries them off to high-ranking officers after she marries the prince. The moral is that "graciousness is beyond price" and that success is often owed to a godmother.

Analysis
"Cinderella" is a rags-to-riches transformation where Cinderella's inherent virtue is recognized and rewarded. In the Aarne-Thompson-Uther classification, it is type 510A, persecuted heroine. Owing to her "exceptionally sweet and gentle nature," Cinderella does not retaliate when mistreated by her stepmother and stepsisters. Instead, Cinderella accepts her bitter fate stoically and only cries in private. Her fairy godmother is impressed by Cinderella's virtue and wishes to offer her the reward Cinderella desires—that is, a chance to go to the ball. "Promise to be a good girl and I will arrange for you to go," her fairy godmother says, explicitly setting up the expectation that virtue leads to reward. Cinderella follows her godmother's instructions, leading to the ultimate reward of marrying a prince. The glass slipper symbolizes both Cinderella's purity of character and the prince's desire to marry such a virtuous woman.

Cinderella proves her virtue beyond doubt in her post-reward treatment of her stepsisters. Instead of giving the stepsisters the punishment they deserve, Cinderella is genuinely gracious and bestows her favor upon them. Thanks to her, the stepsisters also experience upward social mobility, marrying "two gentlemen of high rank about the Court."

Perrault's two morals contradict each other on the question of upward social mobility. The first seems to indicate that Cinderella could achieve the feat of attracting the prince's attention solely based on her character and behavior. If this were the case, then Cinderella could truly use her free will to become an active participant in bettering her situation. However, the second moral reveals that Perrault actually believes fate has much more influence than free will. For all her virtuous qualities, Cinderella would never have married a prince were it not for the fancy clothing her fairy godmother provided that transformed her into her best self. As in "Puss and Boots," clothes serve as a class indicator, signaling that Cinderella truly belongs in the presence of royalty. Without the fairy godmother, in her role in the service of fate, Cinderella would not have the clothes that allow her audience with the prince.